# Introduction

The purpose of the Outbreak Data Analysis Platform is to provide an
accessible and usable data resource to enable research that is relevant
to COVID-19, including new future COVID-19 outbreaks as well as those
arising from other viruses. This will accelerate scientific
understanding of new outbreaks for the benefit of patients and the
protection of the public. To enable this to happen the Outbreak Data
Analysis Platform (ODAP) brings together data from clinical records,
research studies and audit data. ODAP is supported by UKRI and the Data
and Connectivity Programme of the National Core Studies.

ODAP expects a high standard of accountability from researchers, and the
Output Review process is part of this expectation.

## Definitions

**Safe outputs** ensure that all research outputs cannot be used to
identify data subjects. They typically include 'descriptive statistics'
that have been sufficiently aggregated such that identification is near
enough impossible, and modelled outputs which are inherently
non-confidential.

For more definitions, please refer to the ODAP Glossary

## Purpose

The purpose of this policy is to outline the output review process and
who is involved and responsible.

## Scope

This policy applies to researchers requesting outputs from the ODAP
platform, the ODAP Access Team processing requests for outputs and the
ODAP Data Management Team, providing the outputs.

## Review

This policy is managed and maintained by the ODAP data access team. It
is reviewed regularly, and input is requested from the ODAP Data Access
Governance Committee where appropriate.

## Outputs

Outputs can include *the results of the research/data analyses generated
in the allocated ODAP workspaces.*

# Purpose of the Output Review Process

## The 'Five Safes' Framework

ODAP has committed to the 'Five Safes' Framework. This document refers
to number 5 - 'Safe Outputs'

1.  Safe projects -- Is the use of data appropriate?

2.  Safe data -- Is the risk of disclosure in the data minimised?

3.  Safe people -- Can users be trusted to use the data in an
    appropriate manner?

4.  Safe settings -- Can data be accessed in a Trusted Research
    Environment (TRE)?

5.  Safe outputs -- Are there disclosure risks from reported results?

## Purpose

To ensure Safe Outputs, i.e. ensure there are no disclosure risks from
output generated and exported from research conducted within ODAP.

## The Output Review process

Output requests must be submitted to the ODAP data access team who will
liaise with the data management team for oversight before outputs can be
approved to leave the Platform. The results of this oversight must be
given within one week after the output has been requested, and before
any manuscript is submitted to a journal. The Output Review process
comprises of:

-   Disclosure review -- review and remediate potentially identifiable
    information - conducted in researcher's workspace within ODAP.

## Expectations of researchers

ODAP expects a high standard of accountability from researchers, and the
output review process is in addition to this expectation.

-   Researchers are responsible for safe outputs

-   Researchers must be ONS-SRT accredited and have completed their on
    boarding training

-   Researchers must check data and outputs to ensure they are safe and
    in line with project approval

-   Researchers must provide documentation for reviewers to understand
    outputs

-   Researchers are responsible for ensuring they follow any
    requirements from Data Contributors for granted data access.

# Output Review Process: Summary

## Results generated in ODAP

All analyses are approved to take place within the ODAP, and researchers
will be allocated a workspace in which to do their work. This is the
same workspace for outputs.

Outputs can be requested throughout the life time of the project
approved by the ODAP project review panel and/or the data access
governance committee. Output requests must be made using the outputs
request form.

## Disclosure Review -- No identifiable results

The Disclosure Review is undertaken to ensure Safe Outputs, i.e. ensure
there are no disclosure risks from outputs generated and requested for
export from the ODAP. The disclosure review is inclusive of the output
review process and mandatory for each output request.

This step should consider any linkage that may be possible from results
with other data sets

[Responsibility:]{.underline} ODAP Access Team, Stats group expert (if
required) via nomination from the Project Review Panel and/or the Data
Access Governance Committee (DAGC).

A disclosure review can be:

-   Mandated by the Data Contributor (members of DAGC)

-   Recommended by the ODAP Project Review Panel who reviewed original
    project proposal, due to:

    -   Access to sensitive / controversial data

    -   Sample size

    -   Rarity of events

    -   Geographic area

-   Requested by the PI / Research Lead, with rationale

## Decisions

Results approved for export:

ODAP data management team, on instruction from the data access team,
safely export the requested outputs to the researcher/research team.

Results declined for export:

If a review is not approved, feedback will be shared with researchers,
who will have an opportunity to amend and resubmit.

# Document Control

Internal use only.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Document Version: 0.6
  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Publication Date: 

  Review Date:      
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

## Revision History

+------+--------+-----------+-----------------------------------------+
| Ver  | Date   | Author    | Comment                                 |
| sion |        |           |                                         |
+======+========+===========+=========================================+
| 0.1  | 2022   | ODAP Data | Document created                        |
|      | -08-17 | Access    |                                         |
|      |        | Team      | Content drawn from [ICODA Output Review |
|      |        |           | Process](https://icoda                  |
|      |        |           | -research.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/1 |
|      |        |           | 0/ICODA-Output-Review-Process-2.0.pdf). |
+------+--------+-----------+-----------------------------------------+
| 0.6  | 2022   | ODAP Data | Moved to ODAP template                  |
|      | -11-24 | Access    |                                         |
|      |        | Team      |                                         |
+------+--------+-----------+-----------------------------------------+

## Archival Information

To be filled out upon document archival.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Original file     
  name:             
  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Original file     
  location:         

  Archival date:    

  Archived by:      
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
